Beyond Good and Evil is one of the greatest books by a very great
thinker, and like all such books it is very diicult, all the more so
for not seeming to be. It was the  rst book that Nietzsche wrote
after what he considered to be his masterpiece, Thus Spoke
Zarathustra. That had been for him a great creative eeort, and he
never wavered in his view that it contained all the most important
things he had to say. Perhaps it was, none the less, a suspicion that
he had not been so entirely successful in it as he had hoped that led
him to claim that all the books he wrote subsequently, at least up to
Twilight of the Idols (1888), were commentaries on or expansions of
it. When he sent the great historian Jacob Burckhardt a copy of
Beyond Good and Evil (henceforth BGE) he wrote in the
accompanying letter: ‘Please read this book (although it says the
same things as my Zarathustra, but diierently, very diierently).’ If
he hadn't said so, one would hardly have guessed it; and though he
did say so, I'm inclined to disagree. Nietzsche was always obsessed
with there being a pattern to his life and works, and it is entirely
characteristic of him that his last completed work, the wonderfully
bizarre so-called autobiography Ecce Homo, should have been
devoted to establishing what that pattern was, mainly through
tracing the course of his literary productivity in the most
tendentious way. But since he was also obsessed with teasing his
readers, I rather feel that, both in the letter to Burckhardt and in
Ecce Homo, Nietzsche was poking fun, and am inclined to resist his
claim about BGE.

The most obvious diierence between Thus Spoke Zarathustra and
BGE is that in the former we have a narrative, though a tenuous
one, that Zarathustra communicates through parables, exemplary
encounters with a wide variety of people and even animals, and
through sermons addressed to mankind but often insisting on the
necessity of man's being replaced by the Superman. In BGE, by
contrast, Nietzsche is very much concerned with addressing his
contemporaries, in his favourite role of an ‘untimely man’, telling
them things about themselves that he is sure they would rather not
hear. ‘There is not a single good-natured word in the entire book,’
he says in the chapter devoted to BGE in Ecce Homo, wilfully
forgetting considerable tracts of it that express as powerfully as
anything he ever wrote his tormented love for mankind. He also
stresses in Ecce Homo that, while Zarathustra had been his great
work of aarmation, after it he had to do what he had often sworn
that he wouldn't: namely, say ‘No’ as emphatically as possible. On 1
January 1882 he had taken a set of New Year's resolutions, and had
recorded them at the beginning of Part Four of The Gay Science: ‘I do
not want to wage war against what is ugly, I do not want to accuse;
I do not even want to accuse those who accuse. Looking away shall
be my only negation. And all in all and on the whole: some day I
wish only to be a Yes-sayer.’ That day never came – in fact receded
further and further as he went on writing for a nonexistent public.
‘From now on,’ he writes of BGE in Ecce Homo, ‘all my writings are
sh-hooks: perhaps I understand  shing as well as anyone?… If
nothing got caught I am not to blame. There were no  sh…’ And the
less he was taken notice of, the more critical, the more No-saying he
became towards his non-readers. The subtitle of Thus Spoke
Zarathustra is ‘A Book for Everyone and No One’. It turned out to be,
at least in his lifetime, for the latter only. Since it was clear that the
world wasn't ready for Zarathustra's messages, ardently devoted to
proclaiming how life was to be made worth living, Nietzsche turned
more conndently than he had before, even in the great series of
books which preceded Zarathustra, to diagnosing the reasons for the
worthlessness of contemporary existence – both his and ours. Again
in Ecce Homo he writes of BGE that it was ‘in all essentials a critique
of modernity, the modern sciences, the modern arts, not even
excluding modern politics’. But its objects of attack are still wider
than this suggests. For Nietzsche attacks modernity by analysing the
perennial tendencies that it manifests. In giving a critique of
modernity, he is simultaneously producing an account of decadence
– a term to which he was addicted, though oddly enough not in
BGE, where he employs the possibly more drastic word
‘degeneration’.
